 

 Back Doors for Cross-Signed Drivers 

 Home 
 Table of Contents 
 About This Site 

 What’s New? 
 Feedback 
 Consult 

 Geoff Chappell - Software Analyst 

 Back Doors for Cross-Signed Drivers 

 Four undocumented registry values in one key vary the default validation 
 of signatures on kernel-mode code such that Windows 10 may allow cross-signed 
 drivers when it is otherwise documented as requiring Microsoft-signed drivers.

 This may be welcome for running your own drivers on your own computers without 
 having to send them to Microsoft for signing. Or it may be an unwelcome exposure 
 to software that would install drivers by surprise, including to let malware 
 elevate from administrative access to kernel-mode execution. 

 Setting these values requires administrative access. Their action is subject 
 to System Integrity policy, which provides the best defence. 

 Digital signatures on Windows kernel-mode drivers are usefully classified according 
 to how directly the driver’s owner has to involve Microsoft in getting the driver 
 signed: 

 WHQL-signed; 

 cross-signed; 

 self-signed. 

 A WHQL-signed driver is signed with a certificate whose private key is kept 
 by Microsoft so that only Microsoft can do the signing. WHQL means Windows Hardware 
 Quality Labs. For many years the only way that Microsoft would sign a driver for 
 an Independent Software Vendor (ISV) was if the driver was sent to Microsoft with 
 a record of having passed an appropriate WHQL test suite. In those years, a WHQL 
 signature gave some assurance of the driver’s quality. 

 For the many sorts of driver for which Microsoft had not yet devised tests 
 for hardware compatibility, ISVs simply could not get WHQL signatures. Such drivers 
 could instead be cross-signed by the ISV using 
 both a Software Publisher Certificate (SPC) that is issued to the ISV by a third-party 
 certification authority (CA) and a publicly available cross-certificate that Microsoft 
 issues to the CA. In the particular way that Windows validates signatures on drivers, 
 the signature on a cross-signed driver has a root certificate from Microsoft but 
 it’s one that distinguishes the code verification as having been out-sourced. 
 Microsoft’s involvement in cross-signing is only indirect, to vet CAs as having 
 sufficiently high standards for authenticating that whoever they issue their certificates 
 to is an identifiable (and hopefully responsible) software publisher. A cross-signature 
 is some assurance that the driver, of whatever quality, is the work of a specific 
 known entity. 

 Banning Cross-Signed Drivers 

 Of course, there are WHQL-signed drivers that don’t live up to the expected 
 assurance of quality and there are cross-signed drivers that don’t live up to 
 the expected assurance of authenticity. Even if no Microsoft-approved third-party 
 CA ever issued certificates to frauds, some ISVs demonstrably did not guard the 
 private keys in their SPCs carefully enough. Inevitably, kernel-mode drivers written 
 as malware circulated with cross-signatures to look like the commercial products 
 of legitimate (and even prominent) software vendors. 

 For Windows 10, Microsoft took the opportunity to draw a line and make it significantly 
 more difficult for anyone outside Microsoft to sign drivers that Windows will 
 load in anything like ordinary use. Microsoft’s first-known public statement of 
 motivation for

 Driver Signing changes in Windows 10 was: 

 We’re making these changes to help make Windows more secure. These changes limit 
 the risk of a driver publisher’s signing keys being lost or stolen and also 
 ensures that driver publishers are strongly authenticated. 
 For most practical effect, all new drivers must be signed directly by Microsoft. 
 The days of Windows users being exposed to cross-signed drivers that can have 
 been signed by just about anyone, possibly for mischief, possibly without being 
 traceable, are numbered. Though this goal surely could be met securely without 
 going so far as requiring that drivers can load only if signed by Microsoft, there 
 doesn’t look to be any reasonable dispute that the goal is worthy or even that 
 cross-signed drivers would better be gone. 

 To support this new requirement of Microsoft signatures on all new drivers, 
 the programme of signing by Microsoft only after passing WHQL tests is expanded 
 so that a WHQL signature can alternatively be obtained after an
 attestation to Microsoft. Both for the ISV’s one-time 
 registration with Microsoft and on each subsequent submission to Microsoft to 
 get a driver signed, Microsoft requires a very strong verification of the ISV’s 
 identity: not just any old certificate from the many CAs that Microsoft issues 
 cross-certificates to but a more secure and expensive Extended Validation (EV) 
 certificate from a handful of CAs that Microsoft yet approves for this new purpose. 
 The bar is raised, if not directly for the quality of driver writing, then at 
 least for the traceability of the writers. 

 Exceptions 

 Though cross-signed drivers are thus banished in general for Windows 10, there 
 are exceptions. According to what Microsoft presumably intends as the definitive 
 description of

 Driver Signing Policy , “Starting with Windows 10, version 1607, Windows will 
 not load any new kernel-mode drivers which are not signed by the Dev Portal” but

 Cross-signed drivers are still permitted if any of the following are true:

 The PC was upgraded from an earlier release of Windows to Windows 10, 
 version 1607.

 Secure Boot is off in the BIOS.

 Drivers was signed with an end-entity certificate issued prior to July 
 29th 2015 that chains to a supported cross-signed CA.

 Let’s leave aside for now the mystery of Microsoft’s proclaiming this behaviour 
 as new for the 1607 release when it’s very nearly a restoration of the original 
 release’s behaviour which had been relaxed for the 1511 release (apparently without 
 announcement). More or less continuous updates mean the world soon moves on, and 
 mostly has by now. The confusion that Microsoft created for all this in the early 
 releases can now be tipped into the dustbin of history, probably with no lessons 
 learnt (either at Microsoft or in the community of device driver programmers that 
 seemed unable even to want to free itself from the helplessness of depending on 
 Microsoft for thin pickings). Let’s instead take Microsoft’s list of exceptions 
 as definitive for the stated version and for the foreseeable future. How might 
 these exceptions affect you? 

 New Commercial Driver 

 If you’re the writer of a new driver for commercial distribution, then the 
 exceptions don’t much matter. Your only realistic choice is of what sort of WHQL 
 signature, with or without WHQL testing, to get for your driver. If you tried 
 instead to get your customers to configure their Windows for one of the exceptions 
 as your price for their use of your cross-signed driver, then you would soon be 
 out of business. And a good thing, too! Nobody should have to turn Secure Boot 
 off for you, much as you perhaps resent Microsoft telling you to turn it off for 
 your final observations in private of your driver’s performance in real-world 
 conditions before you send it to Microsoft for a signature. 

 Old Cross-Signed Driver 

 If you’re the writer of an old cross-signed driver that is already in commercial 
 distribution and ought to work unchanged for Windows 10, then the exceptions have 
 the doubtlessly welcome effect that your customers will not lose the use of your 
 driver when they upgrade to Windows 10 and you’re not put to the otherwise unnecessary 
 trouble of getting a WHQL signature. Say what you will about Microsoft, but their 
 mostly very good record of attending to backwards compatibility is not appreciated 
 nearly well enough, including to be recognised as a significant reason that Microsoft’s 
 operating systems, rather than some others’, ever got to dominate the mass market.

 Own Driver 

 If you’re the writer of a driver for your own computers, whether for your private 
 pleasure or because you write for internal use by an enterprise (so that “own 
 computers” may mean hundreds, thousands or even hundreds of thousands), then you 
 should want to know the exceptions because one or other of them may be acceptable 
 to you as an alternative to signing contracts with Microsoft and to sharing your 
 intellectual property with Microsoft. I should not be surprised if more than a 
 few government departments, security contractors, discreet financial institutions 
 and secretive research laboratories have gone down this path, perhaps even with 
 a nod and a wink from Microsoft. (See below about an NDA.) 

 Users 

 If you’re an ordinary user of computers—well, a security-conscious user—then 
 you should want to know the exceptions because however much Microsoft’s raising 
 of the bar might benefit the security of Windows users in general, it’s less than 
 beneficial to your security in particular if your computer somehow becomes covered 
 by one of the exceptions and you’re not immediately aware.
 Though it’s not, of itself, a security issue if Windows 
 10 loads a cross-signed driver, it arguably is if such drivers get loaded on your 
 computer when you reasonably expected they would be prevented. 

 What’s reasonable to expect is hard to assess. Microsoft’s own descriptions 
 of driver-signing requirements for Windows 10 have at times seemed impossibly 
 confusing even to experts. For instance,
 Peter Viscarola , 
 a “founder, President and Consulting Partner at OSR” with a long experience not 
 just of device driver development but of close relations with Microsoft, seems 
 more than a little frustrated in
 Yet another query 
 about driver signing : “But to say this stuff is confusing is a considerable 
 understatement.” This was in response to a wider problem, not just of knowing 
 the driver-signing requirements for Windows 10 but of reconciling the varying 
 requirements of multiple Windows versions in multiple configurations. But it was 
 as late as November 2016, well over a year after arranging what might be thought 
 a definitive

 Questions and Answers: Windows 10 Driver Signing with Microsoft’s James Murray, 
 itself done as a welcome service to the OSR community after a long stream of observations 
 such as “I agree it IS more confusing than it should be.” If even experts at writing 
 drivers and educating driver writers have areas of confusion over these requirements, 
 what hope does your typical system administrator, let alone an ordinary computer 
 user, have of appreciating that a seemingly obvious interpretation hides all sorts 
 of subtleties and caveats? 

 New or Upgraded 

 One subtlety is with how your Windows 10 might get to be treated as if it has 
 been upgraded even though you installed it fresh. You might think the difference 
 between new and upgraded is much like the difference between, say, Windows Home 
 and Windows Professional, or even between Windows 10 and Windows Server 2016, 
 and is fixed in stone or is at least tamper-proofed. And so it may be once Windows 
 is fully up and running. But decisions about Code Integrity configuration have 
 to be made not just before the kernel has initialised its support for tamper-proofing 
 but before the kernel is even loaded. If only for now, these early decisions are 
 made independently of the ordinary machinery for licensing. They thus depend on 
 things that are not nearly as well settled or protected as you might think or 
 hope. 

 The closest that Microsoft seems to have come to disclosing that the exception 
 for upgraded systems is decided by something as simple and vulnerable as a registry 
 setting is in a video presentation

 Driver Certification on Windows Client and Server by Scott Anderson on 27th 
 May 2016. I transcribe from eleven minutes in: 

 And then finally, we are actually going to have a registry key. So, as I mentioned. 
 And this registry key is, you know, intended just for testing, so we definitely 
 don't want you setting that registry key as you install the driver. The registry 
 key essentially mimics the same behaviour as if you have, say, an upgraded system. 
 So, like I mentioned, if you have an upgraded system we continue to trust the 
 cross-signed certificates and you'll be able to then test with your cross-signed 
 certificates rather than needing to submit everything to us.

 As far as I know, Microsoft never has published which “registry key” does this 
 magic. According to Peter Viscarola, again, but this time in
 Signing during 
 development and testing on Windows 10 : “The registry key information is only 
 available under NDA.” 

 I see no reason either to doubt him or to suppose that his own knowlege isn’t 
 under the NDA. That disclosure by Microsoft under an NDA “means it’ll probably 
 turn-up in lots of places online eventually” is at least plausible, if cynical, 
 and a setting that’s named UpgradedSystem has indeed 
 turned up on the Internet. I doubt, though, that it has turned up only because 
 someone broke their NDA. As registry settings go, this one never can have been 
 meant to stay secret for long. Its purpose is presumably that Microsoft sets it 
 on all upgraded systems, and so its existence, though not immediately its meaning, 
 will have turned up most readily just from comparing the registries of new and 
 upgraded installations. (If there’s one thing the Internet is reliably good at, 
 it’s to stimulate brute-force analysis by helping it circulate as some kind of 
 research.) 

 It is anyway not safely inferred that UpgradedSystem 
 is the “registry key” from the video. We should perhaps not parse anyone’s conference 
 talk too literally, but see that what’s talked about “essentially mimics” an upgraded 
 system, yet UpgradedSystem is less a mimic than 
 the defining indicator for the Windows loader to know that Windows was upgraded. 
 Also, the “registry key” is said to be something that Microsoft is “going to have”, 
 yet UpgradedSystem was already old, having been 
 introduced for the original release of Windows 10 (not that anyone outside Microsoft 
 seems to have understood its significance so early). 

 Of course, such context is easier to read (or misread) into Anderson’s words 
 if you already know that there are other registry values that he can have meant, 
 including some that were not yet defined in public releases. Within the one registry 
 key are as many as five values that govern whether a driver’s signature must be 
 a WHQL signature to be valid. Most of these evidently aren’t set in the ordinary 
 course of upgrading a Windows installation or even of using Windows. They therefore 
 do not turn up in brute-force comparison of registries. For one, a Google search 
 for the name in quotes gives just one match (today, 11th July 2018), and it’s 
 just another dump from brute-force analysis but this time of plain-text strings 
 in executables. These registry settings are as obscure as such things ever are.

 Security 

 The obscurity of the registry values matters because of something else that 
 Anderson says and for which he plainly intends the obvious direct meaning:
 “we definitely don’t want you setting that registry key 
 as you install the driver.” 

 Well, no, of course we definitely don’t! The banishing of cross-signed drivers 
 for fear that this relatively easy signing with third-party certificates has been 
 hijacked by the unscrupulous would be completely undone if those unscrupulous 
 writers can simply continue as before except to make their installer take the 
 extra step of setting a magic registry value. That they won’t do this if they 
 know how and it works is fanciful beyond words. 

 So, why, you should be asking, am I about to help them? Don’t I heed my own 
 words? You’d certainly be right that I am about to document these registry values 
 and I won’t disagree that my doing so may help the unscrupulous. If they didn’t 
 already know the registry values, they will soon. If they can get administrative 
 access to your computer, then they can set one of these (undocumented) registry 
 values and then set more (documented) values that install their driver. For this 
 very little trouble, they will gain a very good expectation that their driver 
 will load when Windows 10 next restarts even if you have Secure Boot enabled and 
 your Windows was never upgraded. If you ever then discover that you’ve given them 
 kernel-mode access, you may be tempted to blame me for having revealed the means. 
 So be it. I, of course, say to blame Microsoft for having provided the means and 
 for having thought that you didn’t need to be warned—and while you’re at it, direct 
 a little of that blame to those who signed the NDA and thus went along, happily 
 or not, with Microsoft’s security by obscurity. 

 It’s well past time that Microsoft documented the applicable registry values. 
 This is not to say that Microsoft ought to have documented the registry values 
 from the start. Had I been writing this three years earlier, I’d like to think 
 I’d have argued that what matters is not whether the registry values themselves 
 are documented but that the need for and means of defence is documented. It would 
 have sufficed had Microsoft documented that the exceptions are susceptible to 
 being enabled by malware with administrative access and that Windows users may 
 want to defend themselves by various mechanisms that Microsoft would document 
 for easy use. But time has passed. The only ethical strategy this late from Microsoft 
 is full openness—but do not expect you’ll ever see this! 

 What is a WHQL Signature? 

 Before I can list the registry values and describe their effects, we must sort 
 out a question of terminology. What Microsoft’s programmers and technical writers 
 sometimes mean by a WHQL signature when writing about driver signing for Windows 
 10 is not what programmers outside Microsoft have tended to think it means. As 
 noted above, ISVs had been conditioned for a decade to think that getting a driver 
 signed by Microsoft starts with getting it to pass the applicable WHQL test programme 
 (if one exists). Given this background, it’s not the slightest bit surprising 
 that when Microsoft writes some such phrase as “WHQL signature required” in a 
 supposedly helpful table at yet another page on
 Driver Signing 
 Policy , what ISVs read is “WHQL testing required”. 

 Now, I don’t mean to suggest that driver writers are frightened of testing, 
 or to excuse them if they skimp on it, though I certainly do sympathise with their 
 apprehension that WHQL testing may take them down a rabbit hole of overheads that 
 far exceed the technical demands of designing and implementing a solid driver. 
 Where the WHQL tests truly do test just an ISV’s driver, then the ISV can’t credibly 
 be anything but glad that someone else has done the hard and unglamorous work 
 of developing a test rig to use for free. There’s a good argument in such cases 
 that the ISV would do better to run their driver through the WHQL tests even if 
 not needed for driver signing (and even if the driver is for private use). Against 
 this is that there have not always been—and there might not be for a good while 
 yet—WHQL tests that truly do apply to all types of kernel-mode code that ISVs 
 may think to write. Anyone who has even glimpsed the WHQL-testing experience that 
 awaits the writer of a driver of a type that Microsoft has not explicitly supported 
 for its WHQL tests will appreciate how alarming can be even the suggestion that 
 drivers for Windows 10 must get WHQL signatures. If Microsoft didn’t mean that 
 all new drivers for Windows 10 must pass WHQL tests, then Microsoft has been ham-fisted 
 to talk of requiring WHQL signatures. 

 Still, “WHQL signature” plainly is Microsoft’s choice of term, in some contexts, 
 for three types of signature: 

 signatures granted to drivers that pass WHQL tests; 

 signatures on Microsoft’s own drivers (even ones that don’t pass the WHQL 
 tests that Microsoft would select for these drivers if written by ISVs);

 and the new sort of signature that is obtained by attestation. 

 This breadth of interpretation, and particularly its application to the attestation 
 signature, shows in too many places with too much consistency to be anything but 
 intended. For instance, public symbol files reveal Microsoft’s names for internal 
 routines ImgpIsWhqlSignatureRequired in 
 the boot manager and Windows loader and CipWhqlEnforcementEnabled 
 in the kernel-mode Code Integrity module (CI), and if these routines determine 
 that a WHQL signature is required or that WHQL enforcement is enabled, then an 
 attestation signature is ordinarily satisfactory. This even carries through to 
 the user-interface visibility of plain-text descriptions for the CodeIntegrity 
 event log. Events 3082 to 3085 were added for the 1607 release to tell of failure 
 to meet “WHQL requirements” and of “WHQL driver enforcement” being enabled or 
 disabled, yet attestation-signed drivers ordinarily don’t fail the WHQL requirements 
 and do load when WHQL driver enforcement is enabled. 

 Thus did I write (far) above that the programme of signing by Microsoft only 
 after passing WHQL tests is expanded so that a WHQL signature can
 alternatively be obtained after an attestation to 
 Microsoft. As confusing as Microsoft’s terminology surely was for programmers 
 who will entirely understandably have taken the term WHQL signature as suggesting 
 WHQL testing, it’s too late to change now. We all have to stick with it. All I 
 can hope is to clarify that it was Microsoft who made this murky. 

 In this view, and certainly for all this article, a 
 signature that is obtained from Microsoft by attestation is a WHQL signature 
 but of a new type that comes with no WHQL testing and with slightly fewer legal 
 obligations to Microsoft. 

 Taxonomy 

 As to what exactly Windows needs to see in a signature to recognise it as any 
 sort of WHQL signature, I am somehow both astonished and unsurprised to find nothing 
 public that I might simply refer to as definitive, or even as adequate, so that 
 I can move straight on to listing those registry values. 

 WHQL Roots 

 It is, of course, well known that a WHQL signature must have one of relatively 
 few well-known Microsoft certificates as the signature’s root. The boot manager, 
 Windows loader and CI are each hard-coded with identifying details for different 
 selections of Microsoft root certificates. For the following table, I reproduce 
 the common names of the roots that Windows 10 requires for a WHQL signature:

 Common Name 
 Remarks 

 Microsoft Authenticode(tm) Root Authority 
 old roots 

 Microsoft Root Authority 

 Microsoft Root Certificate Authority 

 Microsoft Root Certificate Authority 2010 
 new root 

 Microsoft Test Root Authority 
 old root for

 WHQL Test Signature Program 

 Microsoft Testing Root Certificate Authority 2010 
 new root for WHQL Test Signature Program 

 Microsoft Development Root Certificate Authority 2014 
 (new) root for Insider Preview and flightsigning 

 In practice, the old roots won’t be seen in WHQL signatures that Microsoft 
 gives to new drivers for execution on Windows 10. Of the new roots, Microsoft 
 Root Certificate Authority 2010 is the one to expect in signatures for drivers 
 that are intended for a formal Windows 10 release, rather than for quick fixes 
 and previews. How the certificate chain gets to this root is irrelevant, but different 
 types of signature will be created by signing with different certificates and 
 an observed correlation will tend to be reliable for a time, such that a few examples 
 can usefully be presented for concreteness: 

 Signature Type 
 Certification Path (Root CA to End Entity) 

 built-in 
 Microsoft Root Certificate Authority 2010 

 → Microsoft Windows Production PCA 2011 

 → Microsoft Windows 

 WHQL testing 
 Microsoft Root Certificate Authority 2010 

 → Microsoft Windows Third Party Component CA 2012 

 → Microsoft Windows Hardware Compatibility Publisher 

 attestation 
 Microsoft Root Certificate Authority 2010 

 → Microsoft Windows Third Party Component CA 2014 

 → Microsoft Windows Hardware Compatibility Publisher 

 Remember, though, that these are just correlations that are observed for real-world 
 Windows installations at the time of writing. Microsoft is presumably free to 
 change at will to whatever new certification paths take its fancy. 

 EKU Requirements 

 What does reliably distinguish the different signatures that are obtained from 
 Microsoft in different ways but which all count as WHQL signatures is their Enhanced 
 Key Usage (EKU). A signature is not a WHQL signature just for having one of the 
 necessary Microsoft roots. Its end-entity certificate must have a distinguishing 
 EKU—or even two of them. It seems tidier to tabulate the relevant EKUs before 
 proceeding to what each means and in what conditions it applies: 

 EKU 
 Symbolic Name 
 Details tab in Certificate dialog 

 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.5 
 szOID_WHQL_CRYPTO 
 Windows Hardware Driver Verification 

 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.5.1 
 szOID_ATTEST_WHQL_CRYPTO 
 Windows Hardware Driver Attested Verification 

 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.6 
 szOID_NT5_CRYPTO 
 Windows System Component Verification 

 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.20 
 szOID_WINDOWS_KITS_SIGNER 
 Windows Kits Component 

 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.39 
 szOID_EV_WHQL_CRYPTO 
 Windows Hardware Driver Extended Verification 

 The symbolic names are from WINCRYPT.H for each EKU as an Object ID (OID) in 
 string form. Microsoft’s plain-text descriptions are from the MUI file for CRYPT32.DLL 
 but are more easily experienced via the Digital Signatures tab in the Properties 
 dialog for a file as shown in the File Explorer. 

 The EKU 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.5 is observed in Microsoft’s signatures on third-party 
 drivers for Windows 10 whether the signature was obtained by WHQL testing or by 
 attestation. This is as good a place as any to amplify the point that Microsoft 
 plausibly has thought all along that an attestation signature is naturally a new 
 type of WHQL signature. Attestation signatures are observed to have the additional 
 EKU 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.5.1. Comments with the respective definitions in WINCRYPT.H 
 are instructive: 

 // Signed by Microsoft through hardware certification (WHQL) 
// Signed by Microsoft after the developer attests it is valid (Attested WHQL)

 Beware, though, that presence of the EKU with the appended “.1” in attestation 
 signatures is just an observation. It seems to be true of Microsoft’s practice 
 so far, but the boot manager, Windows loader and CI don’t care about this EKU. 
 To them, any signature that has the EKU 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.5 is a WHQL signature 
 (but read a few paragraphs further for an important caveat). 

 Anything that’s signed with a certificate that has the EKU 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.6 
 may as well be called Windows-signed. This term has support from the names of 
 some internal routines as known from public symbol files, e.g.,
 SbCheckPolicyIsWindowsSigned , which the 
 boot manager, boot loader and CI all have for checking that a Secure Boot policy 
 file is signed by Microsoft. Any signature that has this EKU counts as a WHQL 
 signature. 

 In a few configurations, one more EKU, 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.20, suffices for 
 recognising a signature as a WHQL signature. Examples of this EKU in signatures 
 abound in the Windows Driver Kit (WDK) for Windows 10, but only for ARM and ARM64 
 builds. While I care only for general-purpose computers with x86 and x64 builds, 
 I leave this EKU and the applicable configurations as a diversion that we don’t 
 need for present purposes. 

 The EKU 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.39 does not suffice on its own for counting a 
 signature as a WHQL signature. It can, however, be an extra requirement for 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.5 
 to suffice. This happens if a loaded System Integrity policy sets the “Required: 
 EV Signers” option, as through the XML 

 <Rules>
 <Rule>
 <Option>Required:EV Signers</Option>
 </Rule>
</Rules>

 When this policy option is active, presence of 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.5 in a 
 signature makes the signature a WHQL signature only if 1.3.6.1.4.1.311.10.3.39 
 is present too. Or would a better way to put it be that a signature that has the 
 first but not the second is still a WHQL signature but not a good enough WHQL 
 signature for this stricter policy? The second EKU is observed in Microsoft’s 
 signatures of third-party drivers for Windows 10 that seem to have got the signature 
 through WHQL testing but not on any that look instead to have been signed by attestation. 
 If this observation is indeed how Microsoft means to continue distinguishing these 
 two types of WHQL signature, then there is an implication: when Windows operates 
 under the “Required:EV Signers” policy, if the default validation of a signature 
 on a kernel-mode driver requires a WHQL signature, then a signature that is obtained 
 by attestation will be invalid and a driver that is signed only because of attestation 
 will ordinarily not be allowed to load. I doubt that this is well appreciated 
 by ISVs who get Microsoft to sign their drivers just by attestation. 

 Is a WHQL Signature Required? 

 Now that we know what a WHQL signature is, we can proceed to the registry values 
 that influence whether a signature on a driver must be a WHQL signature if it’s 
 to be valid for driver-loading. 

 Wouldn’t that be nice? But see that I say only influence, not determine. The 
 registry values are not alone in the determination. Indeed, they mostly have the 
 lowest precedence. I also don’t write simply “whether WHQL signatures are required” 
 (though I will start to, for brevity). Most of the factors in the determination 
 do apply generally, but there is one case that is evaluated per-signature. I also 
 hedge around a signature’s being “valid for driver-loading” rather than commit 
 to whether the driver is allowed to load. A driver with a signature that is valid 
 for driver-loading may yet be rejected because of a System Integrity policy. A 
 driver with no such signature may anyway get loaded (notably, but not only, because 
 Windows is running under a kernel-mode debugger). 

 Indeed, while I can find in public no reliable overview of the algorithm for 
 validating signatures on drivers, I also have to gloss over the circumstances 
 in which Windows even cares for whether WHQL signatures are required. Notably, 
 it does not come even close if validation is in the hands of a Secure Boot policy 
 that specifies its own allowed signers. Even in default of that, which is usual, 
 WHQL signatures don’t figure for validation if the signature is already invalidated 
 for not having an accepted root. What counts as an accepted root is subject to 
 some configurable options and varies with the type of driver and the circumstances 
 in which it is being loaded. However important the details may be—and they are 
 historically the most important part of the default validation algorithm—we can 
 put them aside for present purposes except on one count. The effective root of 
 signatures on cross-signed drivers is the Microsoft Code Verification Root. If 
 in the circumstances, this happens not to be among the accepted roots, then signatures 
 on cross-signed drivers are already invalid. 

 Even where a signature isn’t already invalid, the question of whether it must 
 be a WHQL signature may simply be skipped. This happens for exotica such as HAL 
 extensions and ELAM drivers (whose signatures will have long before been invalidated 
 just as signatures unless they satisfy very particular EKU requirements). Starting 
 in the 1703 release, it also happens if the accepted roots have been broadened, 
 as for the testsigning boot option or because of
 Licensed Driver Signing , 
 to allow custom roots. In effect, skipping the question means that a WHQL signature 
 is not required. If a WHQL signature is not required, or if it is but the signature 
 is indeed a WHQL signature, then the signature is valid for this stage and the 
 driver is let through to a second stage which evaluates it against the loaded 
 System Integrity policies. 

 The converse is our primary interest here and may as well be spelt out. If 
 a WHQL signature is required but the signature is not a WHQL signature, then the 
 signature is invalid and the driver will ordinarily not be allowed to load. This 
 is where Windows 10 mostly rejects cross-signed drivers. To understand how it 
 might instead allow them, and might be made to allow them, let’s take as given 
 that validation of some signature has got as far as asking whether a WHQL signature 
 is required. How is this particular question decided? As a rough guide, it’s decided 
 by the following in decreasing order of precedence: 

 Factor 
 Applicable Versions 
 WHQL Signature Required? 

 Test Mode 
 1607 and higher 
 no 

 applicable policy options 
 all 
 yes 

 upgrade in progress; 

 or Windows PE 
 1607 and higher 
 no 

 one registry setting 
 1703 and higher 
 yes 

 Secure Boot disabled; 

 or other registry settings; 

 or old signature 
 all 
 no 

 default 
 all 
 yes, generally; 

 but no in 1511 

 The details, inevitably, depend on whether the validation is done by the Windows 
 loader or by CI and in which Windows 10 release. You should know that I, who have 
 no help from Microsoft except for the formally released executables, documentation 
 and public symbol files, am always behind the times, such that “and higher” presently 
 extends only to the 1803 release. There is, inevitably, much that must still be 
 worked out. What follows is as much as I yet know and have seen how to describe. 
 If you want more, try getting it from Microsoft. 

 Test Mode 

 Starting with the 1607 release, WHQL signatures are explicitly not required 
 if testsigning is enabled. I don’t yet see how this 
 is not redundant in 1703 and higher (which, remember, avoid the question if the 
 accepted roots have been widened to include custom roots). For 1607, however, 
 it looks to have been a bug fix. The point to the testsigning 
 option, perhaps even its reason for existence, is to allow the loading of drivers 
 that are in development and are not yet signed for real-world use. The option 
 is meant to boot Windows in a Test Mode that accepts drivers that have any signature 
 at all, including most notably drivers that are self-signed with simple root certificates 
 that a programmer might quickly make with the makecert 
 tool. This is thwarted in the original and the 1511 releases if a policy option, 
 as described shortly, would require WHQL signatures. Test Mode can have its intended 
 effect only if it has a higher priority than the policy options, which it has 
 in 1607 and higher. 

 Secure Boot Policy Option 

 In all releases, if the active Secure Boot policy specifies the “Required:WHQL” 
 option, then of course WHQL signatures are required. Most computers, but perhaps 
 not most tablets and phones, have only a default Secure Boot policy file embedded 
 in the boot manager’s resources, and it does not specify this option. 

 As to what this option is properly called, I can only guess: Secure Boot policy 
 files look to be completely undocumented. Microsoft surely prepares them from 
 XML, plausibly from the very similar XML that acts as source code for compiling 
 System Integrity policy files via PowerShell’s ConvertFrom-CIPolicy 
 command. Though the binary format of a Secure Boot policy file is not that of 
 a System Integrity policy file, each has a dword of bit flags for options and 
 many of the bits are shared, as if the file formats were developed either in common 
 or one from the other. Where the meaning of a bit is shared, as for this option 
 (0x00000080), I take it as no bad guess that the name in the XML is shared too.

 System Integrity Policy Options 

 If either the “Required:WHQL” or “Required:EV Signers” (0x00200000) option 
 is set in any loaded System Integrity policy, then WHQL signatures are required. 
 The difference, remember, is that the latter is stricter about what sort of WHQL 
 signature is good enough. I can’t find a formal announcement by Microsoft that 
 the “Required:EV Signers” option is intended as invalidating attestation signatures, 
 yet drivers even from prominent vendors such as Lenovo are in circulation with 
 WHQL signatures that were obtained by attestation and do not have the EKU that 
 is required by this option. 

 By the way, you should be aware that System Integrity policies go by many names. 
 I persist in calling them System Integrity policies because this looks to be what 
 they were called by Microsoft’s programmers who wrote the code that interprets 
 the policies. This is the name that survives not only in what the public symbol 
 files tell us of relevant internal routines and variables, but also in the text 
 of error messages, in the names that the files must have, as with SiPolicy.p7b, 
 and in the names that header files from Microsoft’s programming kits assign to 
 error codes, as with STATUS_SYSTEM_INTEGRITY_POLICY_NOT_SIGNED 
 (0xC0E90004). In other contexts, Microsoft uses other names. Code Integrity policies, 
 for instance, are preferred for the PowerShell commands that look to be the whole 
 of Microsoft’s formal support for these policies. Elsewhere, Microsoft refers 
 to Device Guard policies and even to Windows Defender Application Control (WDAC) 
 policies. The last, despite being Microsoft’s latest preference, is conspicuously 
 unhelpful for disguising its applicability to kernel-mode drivers. 

 Audit Mode 

 Whatever we’re to name them, these System Integrity policy options are not 
 absolute. Among the many other options for System Integrity policies is “Enabled:Audit 
 Mode” (0x00010000). This is intended to ease a policy’s preparation by logging 
 what the policy would deny if not in audit mode. If “Required:WHQL” or “Required:EV 
 Signers” would indeed be too restrictive for you by rejecting a driver that you 
 actually do need, then learning about it by auditing the policy and inspecting 
 the log very likely is easier than activating the policy and finding that Windows 
 doesn’t start or that you lose some (peripheral) device without which Windows 
 is difficult to use. Helpful though this crutch may be, it does mean that while 
 “Enabled:Audit Mode” is set, including if it’s set to audit any of the many other 
 things that System Integrity policies can affect, the “Required:WHQL” and “Required:EV 
 Signers” options have greatly diminished effect. 

 For the original and 1511 releases, it would be as well to say the options 
 are defeated. It just doesn’t matter that a “Required:WHQL” or “Required:EV Signers” 
 option says WHQL signatures are required. The “Enabled:Audit Mode” countermands, 
 with the end-effect that WHQL signatures are not required. 

 Starting with the 1607 release, however, audit mode actually does audit. The 
 “Enabled:Audit Mode” option respects the “Required:WHQL” and “Required:EV Signers” 
 options in that WHQL signatures are still required, but if a signature on a driver 
 turns out not to be a WHQL signature, then the driver is granted an override for 
 the audit. If all other things go as usual, the driver with its invalid signature 
 is allowed to load but with an audit trail in the CodeIntegrity event log (specifically, 
 as event 3082). 

 Upgrade in Progress or Windows PE 

 Also starting for the 1607 release, WHQL signatures are not required while 
 Windows is being upgraded or is being run as the Windows Preinstallation Environment, 
 e.g., as a recovery option. Whether an upgrade is in progress is determined from 
 the registry: 

 Key: 
 HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\System\Setup 

 Value: 
 Upgrade 

 Type: 
 REG_DWORD 

 Data: 
 must be 1 

 Operation as Windows PE is indicated by the presence of the
 winpe boot option in the current BCD object. Though 
 both do have the same effect as the documented exceptions, i.e., that WHQL signatures 
 are not required even when Secure Boot is enabled, I list them here only for completeness, 
 not to suggest that they are configurable ways around the usual requirement of 
 WHQL signatures. 

 Registry Values in CI Policy 

 Of the exceptions that Microsoft documents for the 1607 release and higher, 
 whether “Secure Boot is off in the BIOS” is not configurable in the registry, 
 of course, but the other exceptions are—and have been from the very start. 

 Original Exceptions 

 All known releases of Windows 10 recognise a registry value as distinguishing 
 that Windows was installed by upgrading: 

 Key: 
 HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\CI\Policy 

 Value: 
 UpgradedSystem 

 Type: 
 REG_DWORD 

 Mere presence of the UpgradedSystem value means 
 that WHQL signatures are not required. 

 Similarly old is a registry value that can bring forward the cut-off for whether 
 a signature counts as old: 

 Key: 
 HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\CI\Policy 

 Value: 
 WhqlEnforcementDateTime 

 Type: 
 REG_BINARY 

 Data: 
 eight-byte time stamp 

 The data must be exactly eight bytes for interpretation as the usual Windows 
 time stamp, i.e., in 100ns units since 1601. To be valid, the time stamp must 
 be less than 0x01D0C991`830F4000, meaning midnight at the start of 29th July 2015, 
 presumably to be understood as the release date for Windows 10. 

 Very plausibly, the WhqlEnforcementDateTime value 
 only ever existed as an aid to testing in the lead-up to the first release, specifically 
 to observe the different handling of what would count as old and new cross-signed 
 drivers. The valid time stamp from the registry data, else 29th July 2015, acts 
 as a cut-off for deciding whether any particular signature is required to be a 
 WHQL signature. The time taken from the signature for this comparison is version-dependent. 
 The original Windows 10 uses the signing time, if available, else the start time 
 for the end-entity certificate’s period of validity. Only the latter matters for 
 the 1607 release and higher. A signature that predates the cut-off is not required 
 to be a WHQL signature. 

 I would not ordinarily spell out the converse, but there is a subtlety for 
 the 1607 release when the validation is done by the Windows loader, as when a 
 driver has 0 for its Start value. It is still true 
 that if the driver’s signature does not predate the cut-off, then it must be a 
 WHQL signature to be valid. What’s special is that if the signature turns out 
 not to be a WHQL signature, then the driver is granted an exemption. If all other 
 things go as usual, the driver with its invalid signature is allowed to load for 
 apparently no greater price than a complaint in the CodeIntegrity event log (specifically, 
 event 3083). My support for describing this handling as an exemption is that public 
 symbols show that the corresponding event descriptor in CI is labelled
 WhqlEnforcementFailureExempted . That this case of 
 a cross-signed driver being allowed to load is not among the exceptions that Microsoft 
 documents for

 Driver Signing Policy , as quoted far above, is presumably because it was intended 
 from the start to be short-lived. Indeed, where it is listed among the exceptions 
 in the announcement of

 Driver Signing Changes in Windows 10, version 1607 , Microsoft said outright 
 that “Future versions of Windows will block boot drivers” and evidently meant 
 it. 

 Relaxation (1511) 

 As noted above, WHQL enforcement for the original release of Windows 10 was 
 relaxed for the 1511 release. Except if overridden by a Secure Boot policy or 
 System Integrity policy, WHQL signatures are not required. In this release, the 
 two original registry values continue to be read by both the Windows loader and 
 CI, but their contents are immaterial and are ignored. 

 Restoration (1607) 

 For the restoration of WHQL enforcement in the 1607 release, Microsoft seems 
 to have taken the opportunity not only to tweak the original exceptions and to 
 enumerate them in public, but also to embellish the configurability. Starting 
 with the 1607 release, Windows recognises two more values in the
 Policy key. 

 Key: 
 HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\CI\Policy 

 Value: 
 WhqlDeveloperTestMode 

 Type: 
 REG_DWORD 

 Data: 
 must be 1 

 When the WhqlDeveloperTestMode is 1, WHQL signatures 
 are not required. This WhqlDeveloperTestMode value 
 best fits a literal reading of Anderson’s description in Microsoft’s video. Of 
 all the values in the key, only this one is named as if to exist “just for testing”. 
 It does not itself indicate an upgraded system but “essentially mimics”
 UpgradedSystem . And it will have been, at the time, 
 something that Microsoft was “going to have”. Perhaps now that the registry values 
 are all disclosed in public without breaching Microsoft’s NDA, those who have 
 signed the NDA are free to say. 

 Or perhaps not, since the information about which 
 registry value is covered by the NDA is not information that is knowable, with 
 certainty, except through the NDA. From outside Microsoft’s cone of silence, I 
 can’t know that the NDA’s “registry key” is not instead the following, which looks 
 to formalise multiple effects as generalised WHQL settings. 

 Key: 
 HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\CI\Policy 

 Value: 
 WhqlSettings 

 Type: 
 REG_DWORD 

 Data: 
 bit flags 

 A set 0x00000001 bit means that WHQL signatures are not required. 

 The 0x00000002 bit is a sort of opposite in the 1703 release and higher: if 
 it is set, then WHQL signatures are required even if Secure Boot is off. See that 
 it overrides all the other registry values (which are inconsequential unless Secure 
 Boot is on). In the 1607 release, this role of a set 0x00000002 bit as an override 
 of other registry values is all the bit has. It defeats the 0x00000001 bit and 
 the UpgradedSystem value, but not
 WhqlDeveloperTestMode . 

 High bits in the WhqlSettings data consolidate 
 other registry values in the Policy key: 

 0x80000000 for UpgradedSystem ; 

 0x40000000 for WhqlDeveloperTestMode ; 

 0x20000000 for BootUpgradedSystem (see below).

 Each can be set as its own registry value or as the corresponding bit in
 WhqlSettings to have exactly the same effect. This 
 doesn’t mean, of course, that Microsoft intends that they ever be set as bits 
 in WhqlSettings as a registry value, not that we 
 know Microsoft’s intentions about setting anything in any of these registry values.

 Not only do the WhqlSettings consolidate the 
 other registry values and provide separately for disabling and enabling WHQL enforcement, 
 but they survive to the user-interface visibility of the event log. The CodeIntegrity 
 events 3084 and 3085, which record whether “WHQL driver enforcement” is enabled 
 or disabled, qualify their report with two items of event data. The one that’s 
 presented as Settings can have the 0x00000001 and 0x00000002 bits directly from 
 the WhqlSettings and the 0x80000000 bit that corresponds 
 to UpgradedSystem . (If WHQL driver enforcement is 
 instead disabled because of WhqlDeveloperTestMode , 
 then Settings shows as zero.) 

 As an aside, the other item for event data for CodeIntegrity events 3084 and 
 3085 is named Exemption. The 1607 release does not show it in the plain-text report 
 of the event, but later releases do. The Exemption is ordinarily 1 whether WHQL 
 driver enforcement is enabled or disabled. It is 0 only if WHQL driver enforcement 
 is disabled because of a Secure Boot or System Integrity policy option. 

 Boot Drivers (1703) 

 The 1703 release recognises one more registry value in the
 Policy key: 

 Key: 
 HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\System\CurrentControlSet\Control\CI\Policy 

 Value: 
 BootUpgradedSystem 

 Type: 
 REG_DWORD 

 As with UpgradedSystem , mere presence of the
 BootUpgradedSystem value is enough to mean that 
 WHQL signatures are not required. The difference is that
 BootUpgradedSystem acts only for drivers that are 
 loaded by the Windows loader. It is ignored by CI and thus has no effect on drivers 
 that are loaded by the kernel (which by far the most are). 

 A first thought is that the BootUpgradedSystem 
 value exists only as some sort of attempt at continuing something like the exemption 
 that the 1607 release allows for boot drivers whose non-WHQL signature is invalid 
 for not predating a cut-off. I’d hope, though, that there’s more to it. If
 BootUpgradedSystem is present on its own, then the 
 1703 and later releases will typically load cross-signed boot drivers but not 
 load other drivers that are cross-signed. But the CodeIntegrity event log will 
 show that “WHQL driver enforcement” is enabled and, unlike the behaviour in the 
 1607 release, there is no event for each boot driver that gets loaded despite 
 having an invalid signature. 

 Defence 

 Although the registry values can be changed with administrative access, they 
 are neither the first word nor the last in whether they allow cross-signed drivers. 
 Simple options in one or another policy can require WHQL signatures such that 
 the registry values in effect don’t matter. Even if registry values act so that 
 a driver’s signature is not required to be a WHQL signature, the driver still 
 must be evaluated against the full specification of what the System Integrity 
 policies allow or deny. 

 The policy options thus provide a broad defence. The easiest way to prevent 
 all cross-signed drivers from loading is with a System Integrity policy that has 
 the “Required:WHQL” option (and does not have the “Enabled:Audit Mode” option) 
 but otherwise allows everything. Presumably, Microsoft has a readily available 
 example to download, along with clear directions for signing it for protection 
 against the same malware or rude installers that might otherwise have set one 
 of those registry values. 

 The obvious problem with this broad defence is that it’s no help to you at 
 all if you actually do have an upgraded system and with it a dependence on some 
 cross-signed driver or drivers. Of course, Microsoft might rather that everyone 
 in this position should update those drivers—which likely would be beneficial—and 
 then avail themselves of the broad defence. But if the ISV has not yet got an 
 attestion signature or never will, whether for objecting to Microsoft’s procedures 
 or for being out of business, then the broad defence is not available to you.

 With the full power of System Integrity policies, you can specify how you are 
 more fussy about signatures that Windows has otherwise approved, and you can accept 
 or deny drivers as files identified by name, hash, or properties from its resources. 
 For the question of cross-signed drivers that would otherwise be taken as valid 
 because of those registry values, it will help you to remember that signatures 
 on cross-signed drivers have the Microsoft Code Verification Root, which you can 
 codify within a Signer tag as 

 <CertRoot Type="Wellknown" Value="08" />

 You can then black-list or white-list. If you allow cross-signed drivers in 
 general by allowing the Microsoft Code Verification Root, you can set up all sorts 
 of other rules to deny specific signatures or drivers. Perhaps more usefully, 
 just make it that the Microsoft Code Verification Root is neither allowed nor 
 explicitly denied, and then set up other rules to allow just the cross-signed 
 drivers that you actually do want. 

 Productive Use 

 White-listing is not just a finer defence against unwanted cross-signed drivers 
 when you have an upgraded Windows that depends on particular cross-signed drivers. 
 It is also a way that individuals and enterprises that write their own drivers 
 can sign them for their own use without having to send them to Microsoft and without 
 exposing their computers to cross-signed drivers from anyone else. Being able 
 to use your own cross-signed drivers is of course a very poor cousin of getting 
 Windows to accept drivers that you sign with your own certificates—but the rich 
 cousin, integrated with Secure Boot for distinguishing your drivers from others’, 
 is kept by Microsoft as something you need to be licensed for. Until this changes, 
 the combination of setting a registry value for an exception to allow cross-signed 
 drivers and installing a System Integrity policy to deny cross-signed drivers 
 other than your own is as much control of driver-loading on your own computers 
 as Microsoft permits you. If you dislike that, then you know who to petition.

 Policy Preparation 

 Microsoft may yet publish formal documentation of System Integrity policies. 
 Meanwhile, though Microsoft’s cook-book approach to describing what can be done 
 with System Integrity policies is mostly directed at user-mode code integrity 
 (UMCI) for controlling applications, enough is provided for getting by if you’re 
 prepared to put in the time for trial-and-error or if you know by other means 
 how the things work. I’d help more—and I may yet since documenting System Integrity 
 policies is very firmly on my radar. But I also think that these back doors for 
 cross-signed drivers are a mess of Microsoft’s making—indeed, just a small part 
 of a big mess that Microsoft made over the whole subject of driver-signing requirements 
 for Windows 10—and it’s properly Microsoft’s mess to sort out. 

 This page was created on 7th July 2018 and was last modified 
 on 11th August 2018 (except for spelling corrections and some very slight rephrasing 
 or restyling on 7th June 2019, 1st March 2020 and 30th March 2021). 

 Copyright © 2018-2021. Geoff Chappell. All rights reserved. 
 Conditions apply .
